All right so in this lesson what we're gonna do is we're gonna run this gradient descent without sin
pie.
We're going to look at making our Jupiter notebook a little bit more performance.
This gives us a chance to solve this problem the old fashioned way the way we've done it for the previous
examples.
And one reason to do this is that you'll notice this performance difference in your Jupiter notebook
because it turns out running it without some pie is actually much faster.
But first let's add the markdown for partial derivatives in late tech notation.
So when I go back to this section heading here and we're going to write down the partial derivatives
in mathematical notation because it will give us a good opportunity to see a few more of these late
tags in action in our print statement on the cell below.
We've got the partial derivative with respect to x and it looks like this.
So the question is how to translate this very little bit ugly and unreadable equation into late tax
notation.
The first thing I want to do is use the opening double dollar sign tax and I'm going to have a little
fraction here.
And I say backslash frank open curly braces f closing curly braces opening curly braces X closing curly
braces and then two more dollar signs let's see what this looks like.
So we can see that our fraction tag and the dollar science together center our equation like this.
So let's take a look at this as we get a bit bigger.
And when you add the two pound symbols before this thing and press shift and take in so we can see it
a bit larger.
Now I'm going to add the mathematical notation for the partial derivatives so I can go back into my
fraction and use the backslash again and before the f I may use a tag called partial and have a space
and you can see that the markdown actually highlights this tag differently.
Highlighted in green just like it does with the fraction tag.
So that way I know just from the syntax highlighting that this is a legitimate late hash tag.
And then also add the partial tag to the bottom.
So when see backslash partial Space X and then after the curly braces are going to put an equal sign
and I'm going to press shift enter and see what it looks like in here we go here we can see the partial
tag translates into these little delta symbols for the equation.
Okay so now we can have the top part of the fraction on the right hand side.
And that was two X and then we had log when is the natural log here.
So backslash Ellen and it was three times three to the power of and then curly braces minus X to the
power of two minus Y to the power of two closing curly braces.
Let's see what this looks like now.
Now one thing I don't like is this time symbol that we've got here would be much nicer to have a dot
and there is a latex tag for that as well.
And it's backslash C dot pressing shift enter.
We can see that it now looks like this which is a lot nicer.
So we've got our top part of a fraction now.
Now all I have to do is actually.
Well now all I have to do is actually put it in a fraction.
So I'm going to say backslash Frank open curly braces and at the end closing curly braces.
And when I open another pair of curly braces at the end this is going to be for the bottom part of our
fraction at the bottom we had three to the power of.
And then it was curly braces minus X to the power of two minus Y to the power of two closing curly brace
plus one.
Let's press shift enter and see what this looks like.
So in our equation looks like that we've got a fraction.
We've got the top part and we've got the bottom part but this isn't quite correct.
We have to add a little bit more notation since the bottom is actually squared.
So how do we do that.
One of the things I can do is I can take a parentheses here and a parentheses at the end and then have
that whole thing to the power of two and pressing shift enter.
It would then look like this.
I have the parentheses and then the two.
Like so.
And you know the thing is this isn't even all that terrible.
But I can use latex notation again to style these parentheses a little differently.
So instead of having just a normal parentheses here I can actually have a backslash and say left parentheses.
So this is one of the tags.
And then at the end here instead of having the closing parentheses I can actually also put backslash
right and then have the closing parentheses like so.
So this code here this markdown now refers to the right or closing parenthesis then you press shift
enter to show what this looks like in comparison.
You can seen how with the left parentheses and right parentheses using the latex tags it actually looks
a lot better.
And just like that where we're done we have cut our partial derivative with respect to x formatted very
beautifully in latex notation let's add the partial derivative with respect to y now so so this is the
really easy part because all we have to do is copy this paste it and change this X to a Y and change
this X to a Y and press shift into how we've got both our partial derivatives displayed here.
Now if you're suspicious and you don't believe me that this is indeed the partial derivative for Y then
you can go down here and you can refresh this cell here just by changing this a her where we're calling
the differentiation function from simplify to be hitting shift enter and then you should be able to
confirm that this indeed is the partial derivative with respect to y.
So now that we've figured out the functional form for both of these partial derivatives can you as a
challenge can you write these partial derivative functions as Python functions.
I'll also give you a hand when you're writing the python functions.
There's actually one additional requirement that you have to consider also for the function names use
the names FP X and FP y for the names of the partial derivative functions.
I'll give you a few seconds to pause the video and give this a shot.
All right you ready.
Here's the solution for the solution.
I'm going to add a little Python comment.
Now let's just say partial the root of functions.
Example for
and here they are.
It's gonna be d f FP X which needs two inputs an X and a Y colon and to write the partial derivative
for this I'm going to again use a little simplification and define a variable called R and that's gonna
be equal to part of my expression.
I'm going to have three to the power of minus X squared minus Y squared.
So then my derivative is going to be two times x times log three times are.
This is the top part and the bottom part of that fraction is gonna be r plus 1 squared and that's it.
That's my partial derivative with respect to x and as we've already discussed this is very very similar
to the partial the root of.
With respect to y so I'm just going to copy this and change this to Y and change this X in my written
statement to y as well.
Now I said there was one requirement that you have to take into account and this is the log function
here.
This comes from the math library.
The math module and we have to import this functionality in our Python notebook for it to work.
Otherwise when it comes to running FP X or FP y to evaluate one of these functions you're actually gonna
get an error.
So if I had FP X and one point eight and one point zero and a head shift enter on this cell I'm actually
going to get an error.
And the reason is is that log is not defined.
I can't just use the log functionality like I would up here without importing the module first.
So let me go back up to the very very top and then down here.
I'm going to say from math import log.
Then when minute shift enter on this and I can scroll back down again I can try rerunning this cell
here and I can see that my slope my partial derivative with respect to x is equal to zero point zero
three seven.
Which is exactly what I am getting here.
In this case I'm using simplified to evaluate my partial derivative.
And in this case I've already got my partial derivative here as a function and I can just plug in the
values.
So on question you might ask is Well why did you use log wise it's not Ellen and the answer is is that
if I check the documentation on this then you see here if I hit that little plus sign that if the base
is not specified.
So if there's no second argument being passed to this function it returns the natural logarithm.
So Ellen base e of X..
So in fact this log 3 is the natural logarithm or Ellen which is what we've got up here for our partial
derivative function in the latest notation.
So now we've got that out of the way we can do a bit of a horse race between these two methodologies
we can namely take this cell here and we're gonna copy it when I copy this cell and what we're gonna
do is we're gonna paste that cell here.
I don't need this one I'm going to delete that.
So when I go to edit delete cells and then I'm going to modify this cell in particular I want to modify
these two parts
to use my FP X and my FP y functions instead.
You know what.
Maybe you should give this a quick shot see if you can figure out what code should go here in order
to use FP X and FP y the partial derivative functions instead of what we had before.
I'll let you pause the video and I'll show you how to do it in a second all good.
Here's the solution.
You simply call the two functions and supply the x value and the y values.
So the X value was under her arms.
Square brackets zero and the y value was under paradigms square bracket one.
And that's it.
That's the gradient or partial derivative with respect to x and for our gradient in the y direction
we do exactly the same thing with one difference.
We're gonna use FP y.
The partial derivative with respect to y.
And we're gonna supply the same two inputs the first value in our array and the second value in our
array.
Now I'm going to run the cell with 500 iterations and see how well it performs.
Ready steady go hand it's done going back up here to where we're using simple high I can change the
maximum number of iterations to 500 and rerun the cell thinking thinking thinking thinking thinking
there we go.
So you can see that Python is actually doing a lot of extra work in this case every single time this
loop runs it has to differentiate our cost function and then evaluate that cost function.
And these instructions actually are a little bit more resource intensive than if it already knew from
the get go what the partial derivative was.
And this is one of the drawbacks of why you might not want to use simple high in your loop if you're
running an optimization algorithm many many many times.
So I hope you enjoyed that.
So I really think this is an interesting exercise because it really shows some of the pros and cons
of the different tools that are at our disposal.
On one hand simple it can make our life a lot easier when it comes to calculating derivatives and doing
symbolic mathematics and much much more.
But on the other hand it does show that you have to be clever when it comes to running your optimization
algorithm.
You do have to think about a little bit about the resources that you're using and running your optimization
and this kind of goes back to thinking like an engineer.
Thinking about the resources that are at your disposal and how you can write your code and how you can
choose your algorithm to make the most use of the resources that you have OK.
So what's left to do.
Well only one thing right.
Plotting the gradient descent on our wonderful 3D chart and this is what we're going to do next lesson.
So I still got that coffee pumping through my veins so I hope I'll see you there.